The Al-Murawid movement was founded by Abdullah ibn Yasin, a scholar from Southern Morocco.
He belonged to the Sanhaja tribe of the Amazigh.
His people were mostly Muslim, but they had a very limited understanding of the faith.
Abdullah had traveled to Al-Andalus to study and had returned with the mission to preach it to his people.
He wanted to unite the Amazigh tribes in the name of Jihad just as Prophet Muhammad had united the tribes of Arabia.
He was invited by a man named Yahya ibn Ibrahim, a tribal chief of a sub-clan of the Sanhaja to teach his tribe.
Yahya had just returned from the Hajj and he had realized that there was a lot that his people didn't know about Islam.
Ibn Yasin accepted the invitation.
This was around the year 1035 CE.
Ibn Yasin tried to enforce a simple but rigid view of Islam on Yahya's tribe.
He introduced the punishment of brutal floggings.
Everything from adultery to minor mistakes in prayer were punished severely.
This, as you might expect, made him quite a few enemies.
When Yahya ibn Ibrahim died, Ibn Yasin was thrown out.
He, however, was just getting started.
He visited another sub-clan of the Sanhaja, the Banu Targhut.
The leaders of the clan, two brothers named Yahya ibn Umar and Abu Bakr ibn Umar, saw a great amount of potential from their friendship with Ibn Yasin.
Ibn Yasin started Islamizing the tribe and united them.
Eventually, his followers got powerful enough that they were able to declare jihad against the tribes of southern Morocco in 1054 CE.
It was after this victory that Ibn Yasin took to calling his followers Al-Murabitun.
The word probably comes from its usage in the Qur'an where it means a band of people gathered to fight.
The name itself was a very powerful thing.
It came from the Qur'an so it showed that these men were united by faith and anyone, regardless of birth and tribe, could join.
Al-Murabitun was later deformed into Al-Murawid.
At the time, the empire had begun to emerge.
It extended from Sij-al-Masa to Al-Daghast.
However, in 1056 CE, Yahya ibn Umar was killed and his brother Abu Bakr became leader.
Three years later, in 1059 CE, Ibn Yasin went to the Atlantic coast of Morocco to preach to a tribe called Bargwata.
He was killed there.
Abu Bakr was now the sole ruler of the young empire.
The core of the empire was made up of the desert tribes of Sanhaja and the mountain tribe of Masmuda.
Around 30,000 men could be mustered up when needed.
The empire was truly something to behold considering how quickly it had formed.
In 1070 CE, a new city was founded to serve as the capital.
This city was named Marrakech, which is where the Arabic name for Morocco comes from.
Soon after this, there was a rebellion in the Sahara.
An old rival tribe had revolted and Abu Bakr needed the Sahara to keep his trade going.
So Abu Bakr led an army south and left his cousin Yusuf ibn Tashfin in charge.
When he returned, Yusuf refused to return power to Abu Bakr.
Abu Bakr was instead told, politely but firmly, to leave.
He spent the remainder of his days trying to secure control over southern Morocco and Ghana without ever challenging Ibn Tashfin.
Ibn Tashfin was, in many ways, the first ruler of the empire.
He sent a delegation to the caliph in Baghdad, al-Mustazhir, who gave him a formal written investiture of the government of the Maghrib in return for an oath of allegiance, basically lip service.
Yusuf extended his control north.
Major cities like Fez, Tlemcen, Saleh, and Tangier were brought into the Almoravid fold over the next years.
These conquests had been mostly peaceful.
People usually just welcomed the Almoravids and old leaders were allowed to stay in power.
The empire only relied on gold from Ghana for administrative and military expenses.
Taxes weren't common.
In fact, the Almoravids were very much against un-Islamic taxes and basically only collected jizya from non-Muslims.
Maghrib was secure under the Almoravid and now Ibn Tashfin looked north across the Strait of Gibraltar.
After the fall of Toledo, Seville was under threat from Alfonso VI of Leon Castile.
It's not known which Taifa invited Ibn Tashfin, but well, in July 1086 CE, he landed on Iberia with around 12,000 men.
He was greeted with enthusiasm by the locals, who set up markets for them.
Later he was joined by the rulers of Seville, Granada and Badajoz.
Alfonso was busy with the siege of Zaragoza at the time, but he decided to crash the party and met the allied forces at a place called Zalaca or Sagrajas to the northeast of Badajoz.
The allied force defeated the Christians, who were forced to retreat.
The allies wanted to pursue them, but Ibn Tashfin was reluctant to stay in Al-Andalus for long.
Alfonso had been defeated, but by no means was he broken.
Alfonso began to harass the Muslims again.
The Taifas were once again threatened by the Christians.
Various cities and forts that had been abandoned by the Christians were retaken.
Once again, the Almoravids were called on for help.
Ibn Tashfin arrived in Al-Andalus again in 1088 CE, where he was joined by the ruler of Seville and the ruler of Granada, while the rulers of Almeria and Mercia sent support but were absent themselves.
Ibn Tashfin laid siege to the castle at Aledo.
Before Ibn Tashfin could do anything about the fact that the Almoravids were less than useless in siege, the tensions amongst the Taifas were starting to make themselves apparent to Ibn Tashfin.
The ruler of Granada, Abdullah, couldn't shut up about his brother taking over Malaga and splitting off, while the rulers of Seville and Mercia couldn't stop complaining about each other.
Fed up with their problems, Ibn Tashfin called on a council of religious scholars to adjudicate on the dispute between Seville and Murcia.
The council decided in favor of Seville, at which point Murcia withdrew their support from the siege.
On top of that,
Reports came in that Alfonso was coming to help the besieged castle.
Ibn Tashfin decided to pack up and return to Morocco.
Ibn Tashfin blamed the fiasco at Aledo entirely on the Taifa rulers and rightly so.
He decided that he would either return as the undisputed leader of the Muslims or not at all.
In 1090 CE, he landed in Iberia again and forced Granada and Malaga to surrender.
However, he again left Iberia
but this time he left his nephew, Seer ibn Abu Bakr, behind to continue his work.
Ibn Tashfeen started efforts to declare the Taifa rulers unlawful because of their impious acts.
Seville, feeling threatened, continued to make alliances with Alfonso,
further making Ibn Tashfin angry.
In 1091 CE, Seer Ibn Abu Bakr took over Granada and the Guadalquivir Valley.
He even defeated a Christian army which was coming to the aid of Seville.
By the end of the year, he forced Seville into surrender.
Another Almoravid army took over Almeria and Aledo in the same year.
He forced Badajoz into submission as well.
However, Badajoz tried to strike a deal with Alfonso, asking him for military support in exchange for Lisbon.
Cyr found out and took over the whole Taifa in 1094.
Valencia was ruled by a puppet of Alfonso and was protected by El Cid.
Almoravid forces tried again and again to take it over but were defeated.
Eventually, in the summer of 1097, Ibn Tashfin arrived in person to lead the offense.
Various battles were fought and won against the Christians but in the end, where the Almoravid forces were powerful in the field, they lacked in siege and were unable to take a single fortress of any importance.
Nonetheless, by 1099, after the death of Al-Sid, Valencia was taken over despite the valiant efforts by his wife.
By 1100 CE, Zaragoza and Almoravids were the only Muslim rulers in Iberia.
Ibn Tashfin celebrated by declaring his son Ali formally as his heir.
Ibn Tashfin died on the first day of the Islamic year 500 AH, which was 1106 of the Common Era.
He left behind an empire in total control of Morocco and Muslim Iberia.
The empire was not only powerful but also very popular amongst its subjects.
However, it had failed to achieve any territorial victories against the Christians, with the exception of Valencia.
Toledo and the Middle Tagus Valley remained firmly under the control of the Christians.
It's said that before Ibn Tashfin died, he gave his son three pieces of advice.
And like all good sons, Ali wasn't listening.
The first advice was not to make the people of the Atlas Mountains and other Masmuda tribesmen angry.
The second was to make a truce with Zaragoza and keep them as a buffer between him and the Christians.
The third and final one was to honor the people of Cordoba.
Ali ibn Yusuf spectacularly failed to act on any of them.
Ali ibn Yusuf ibn Tashfin was a very different man from his father.
He was born in 1084 CE, with the Almoravid Empire well established.
He was a very urban man.
He had never lived or perhaps even visited his ancestral homelands in the Sahara.
He was only 22 or so when he came to power.
There were no disputes of succession because his father had secured allegiances for him in his life.
While he was a good man in general, he lacked his father's energy, especially in Al-Andalus, where he put his brothers in charge.
His brother, Tamim, ruled out of Granada, which was effectively the capital of the Andalusi part of the Almoravid Empire.
Marsiya was controlled by another one of his brothers, Muhammad ibn Aisha, whose last name is his mother's and not his father's.
It shows the importance of maternal ties in certain Moroccan tribes.
The Almoravid conquest of Spain had slowed down by the time Ibn Tashfin died, but in 1108 CE, Tamim ibn Yusuf ibn Tashfin laid siege to Euclid, east of Toledo.
Alfonso found out and sent an army to defend.
The army was crushed decisively by the Almoravids,
Their strength on the battlefield was on full display once more.
However, after the battle, their weakness was also on display.
Al-Murawid forces were unable to take the fortress despite their best efforts.
Their lack of siege skills was, once again, very apparent.
They couldn't reduce the fortress and finally took it when they pretended to withdraw and the fortress garrison opened the gates.
They returned and fought the garrison and took over the fortress.
Christians in nearby fortresses abandoned theirs as well and opened the way to Toledo.
The next year in June 1109, Alfonso died.
His only son and heir, Sancho, was killed in a previous battle with the Almoravids.
Sultan Ali thought that it was time to attack Toledo.
The Almoravid forces ravaged the countryside and took cities and forts around Toledo.
However, when they attacked Toledo itself, the garrison held out.
Their weakness is siege was again on full display.
They had to end the siege and go home after some weeks.
In 1110 CE, the ruler of the independent Taifa of Zaragoza died and the Taifa was cannibalized by the Almoravids.
A man named Ibn al-Hajj, an Almoravid veteran commander, was installed as governor there.
He extended his power all the way up to the Pyrenees.
This was the last time a Muslim army would reach those mountains.
This was the first of Ibn Tashfin's deathbed advices to be neglected by Ali.
Ibn al-Hajj, along with Muhammad ibn Aisha, led a large-scale expedition into Catalonia in 1114 CE.
While the expedition itself found moderate success, the army was ambushed on the way back and both commanders lost their lives, which was a great loss for the Almoravids.
In 1117CE, Ali himself landed in Al-Andalus and took an army up to Coimbra.
He was able to take the city, but the city had to be abandoned soon after because it was fairly difficult to control.
This, along with the ambush three years prior, was a serious sign that al-Murawid power
was waning.
As soon as the Almoravids stopped their expansion, the Almoravid Empire became unstable.
Throughout the period of their success, they were very popular.
They were considered to be a godsend by the Muslims against the Christians.
Their taxes were low and overall people liked them.
However, most of the ruling elites were descendants of Ibn Tashfin's great-grandfather, Dughrut ibn Bartasin.
Andalusi Muslims were almost completely excluded from the elites.
Not only that, but the Almoravid elites were distinguished from the locals.
In short, the Almoravids were an alien minority.
In 1118 CE, Zaragoza was besieged and taken by Alfonso, the Battler of Aragon.
Different Alfonso than the one we've been talking about previously.
Ali sent a major expedition to take back the land that was lost, but the army was decisively defeated at Qutanda in 1120 CE.
One after the other, northern cities fell to Alfonso.
As Ibn Tashfin had warned on his deathbed, the fall of Zaragoza led to a lot of damage to the Almoravids.
Just three years later, in 1121 CE, another one of Yusuf's warnings was tested.
As Ibn al-Athir, a contemporary historian, writes, The Emir al-Muslimeen, Ali ibn Yusuf, had appointed as governor of Cordoba Abu Bakr Yahya ibn Rawad.
On the day of sacrifice, when the people had come out to enjoy themselves, one of the abid, the slave soldiers, ibn Abdun, warned against, grabbed hold of a woman.
She cried out to the Muslims for help and they came to her aid.
A serious fight developed between the Abid and the people of the town, which lasted the whole day.
There was open warfare until night came and the two sides separated.
When the news reached the Ameer Abu Bakr, he gathered the Faqees and the principal citizens, Ayyan, who said, you should execute one of the Abid who began the disturbance, but he refused and became angry.
The next morning, he prepared the arms and equipment to fight the people of the town, so the Fuquha,
The principal citizens and the young men of the town mounted and they fought him and forced him to flee.
Then they laid siege to the palace and stormed it and he fled from them after a severe mauling.
They then looted the palace and burned the houses of the Almoravids, pillaged their property and drove them from the town in disarray.
When the news reached the Amir al-Muslimeen, he was seriously concerned, so he collected the troops of Zanhaja, Zanara and the Amazigh and others and formed them into a great army.
He then crossed to Al-Andalus in the year 515 to attack them and laid siege to the city.
The inhabitants fought them as people do when they are defending their lives, their families and their property.
When the Emir al-Muslimeen saw how fierce the resistance was, he sent envoys to them and he sought peace, which they granted, on condition that they compensated the Almoravids for the property they had stolen.
Then the capital quietened down and the fighting stopped.
The revolt at Cordoba was damaging to the Almoravids, but it was not fatal.
The fatal blow would come from the Atlas Mountains, from the first warning of Ibn Tashfin.
From those mountains, a religious movement whose origins somewhat mirror the origins of the Almoravids themselves would bring about the end of the Almoravid regime.
